## Privilege Escalation

Our initial access to a remote host is generally low-privileged user. It doesn't give full control over the box.
- This requires us to find an internal/local vulnerability to be able to get to **root** on linux or **admin/SYSTEM** user on windows.

## Checklist
- After initial access, thorougly enumerate the remote host to identify any local vulnearbilities.
- [HackTricks](https://book.hacktricks.xyz/linux-hardening/privilege-escalation) provides a checklist that can be used to escalate privilege.
[PayLoadsAllTheThings](https://github.com/swisskyrepo/PayloadsAllTheThings) repo is also a great resource.
- There are several checklists available online. You should explore those.
- **with various commands and techniques and get familiar with them to understand multiple weaknesses that can lead to escalating our privileges**
<hr>

## Enum scripts
Enumeration scripts are run locally on a victim machine to enumerate basic system info and search for common privilege escalation vectors such as world writable files, misconfigurations, clear-text passwords and applicable exploits.
- Common enumeration scripts are
    - [LinEnum](https://github.com/rebootuser/LinEnum)
        - Kernel and distribution release details
        - System Information:
            - Hostname
            - Networking details
            - Current IP
            - Default route details
            - DNS server information
        - User Information:
            - Current user details
            - Last logged on users
            - Shows users logged onto the host
            - List all users including uid/gid information
            - List root accounts<br>
        --------SNIP----------
    - [LinPrivChecker.py](https://github.com/sleventyeleven/linuxprivchecker)
        - Executed locally on a Linux box to enumerate basic system info and search for common privilege escalation vectors such as world writable files, misconfigurations, clear-text passwords and applicable exploits
- Another useful tool is (Privilege Escalation Awesome Scripts SUITE PEASS)[https://github.com/peass-ng/PEASS-ng]

<hr>

## Vulnerabilities to look for in the output of the Enum scripts

1. Kernel Exploits:
    - In old operating systems, start by looking for potential kernel vulnerabilities that may exist.
    - Kernel exploits can cause system instability.
    - It is best to try them in a lab environment.
2. Vulnerable SW:
    - Use ***dpkg -l*** on linux or ***C:\Program Files*** on windows to see what SW is installed on the system. 
    - If any older versions of SW is in use that hasn't been patched, look for public exploits. 
3. User Privileges:
    - After gaining access to a server, look for the privileges available to the user we have access to.
    - See if we can run commands for specific tasks as root or other user.
    - Some common ways to exploit certain user privileges:
        - **Sudo**: Usually used to allow a lower privileged user to run commands as root without giving them access to the root user. 
            - Use ***sudo -l*** to check what sudo privileges we have.
            ```bash
            TheKamaraju1@htb[/htb]$ sudo -l

            [sudo] password for user1:
            ...SNIP...

            User user1 may run the following commands on ExampleServer:
                (ALL : ALL) ALL
            ```
            - Use ***sudo su -*** to switch to root user.
            ```bash
            TheKamaraju1@htb[/htb]$ sudo su -

            [sudo] password for user1:
            whoami
            root
            ```
            - Once we find a particular application we can run with sudo, we can look for ways to exploit it to get a shell as the root user.
                - [GTFOBins](https://gtfobins.github.io) is a curated list of Unix binaries that can be used to bypass local security restrictions in misconfigured systems.
                - It contians a list of commands and how they can be exploited through sudo. It may tell us the exact command we should execute to gain root access using the sudo privilege we have
        - **SUID**
        - **Windows Token Privileges**
4. Scheduled Tasks:
    - Its called Scheduled Tasks on Windows and Cron Jobs on Linux.
    - They run methods that run scripts at specific intervals to carry out a task. 
        - Ex: anti-virus scan running every hour or a backup script that runs every 30 minutes
    - To take advatnage of these jobs to escalate privilege, there are 2 ways
        - Add new scheduled tasks/cron jobs
        - Trick them to execute a malicious software
    - First, check if you have permissions to add new scheduled tasks.
    - If we have write permissions, you can look at specific dirs to add your new cron job.
        - /etc/crontab
        - /etc/cron.d
        - /var/spool/cron/crontabs/root
    - Write to a dir called by a cron job. Put a reverse shell script there and wait for it to execute.
5. Exposed Credentials:
    - Look for exposed credentials in files we have read access to.
    - Common in ***configuration*** files, ***log*** files, and user ***history*** files (bash_history in Linux and PSReadLine in Windows)
    - The enum scripts from earlier normally look for exposed credentials.
    - If any passwords are exposed, check for **password reuse** as well.
    ```bash
    TheKamaraju1@htb[/htb]$ su -

    Password: password123
    whoami

    root
    ```
    - Try to ssh into a server using the **password reuse** case.
6. SSH Keys
    - Check if you have read access to ***.ssh*** dir of the user. If yes, we maybe able to read their private key
        - <code>/home/user/.ssh/id_rsa</code> or 
        - <code>/root/.ssh/id_rsa</code>
            - If you can read root ssh key, copy it to your local machine and use <code>-i</code> flag to login as root
            ```bash
            TheKamaraju1@htb[/htb]$ vim id_rsa
            TheKamaraju1@htb[/htb]$ chmod 600 id_rsa
            TheKamaraju1@htb[/htb]$ ssh root@10.10.10.10 -i id_rsa
            ```
    - Check if you have `write` access to the <code>.ssh</code> dir.
        - This allows you to put your own SSH `public key` in that file so that you can login as that user.
        - You can put your own public key in `/home/user/.ssh/authorized_keys`
        - This is how it works:
            - Imagine there's a server called remotehost running on IP 10.10.10.10, and there's a user named john who works on this server. The attacker manages to gain access to John's account, but they want to elevate their privileges and become the root user (who has complete control over the system). Here's how they do it:
            - `Step 1`: Gaining Access to John's Account
                - The attacker first finds a way to gain access to John's account, perhaps by exploiting a vulnerability or guessing John's password. After logging in as John, they check the SSH configuration. <br>They realize that John's `.ssh/` directory is `writable`. This is critical because it means the attacker can add their own SSH key to John's list of authorized keys.
            - `Step 2`: Generating an SSH Key Pair
                - To exploit this access, the attacker generates an SSH key pair on their own machine (their local host) using the following command:
                ```bash
                ssh-keygen -f key
                ```
                - This generate 2 keys `Key`: This is the private key that the attacker keeps secure on their local machine.<br>`key.pub`: This is the public key that will be used to gain access to the target machine.
                - The attacker saves these files and will use key.pub for the attack.
            - `Step 3`: Adding the Public Key to John's `.ssh/authorized_keys`
                - We put `key.pub` on John's machine at `/home/john/.ssh/authorized_keys` file on the remotehost server.
                - Login as John and run the command
                ```bash
                echo "ssh-rsa AAAAB... attacker_public_key" >> /home/john/.ssh/authorized_keys
                ```
                - This adds our ssh public key to John's authorized keys. Now, you can SSH into the system as John without needing John's password.
            - `Step 4`: SSHing into the Server as John
                - Logout of John's account and login in using your own private key as John
                ```bash
                ssh john@10.10.10.10 -i key
                ```
                - The -i key flag specifies that the attacker is using the private key that was generated earlier
            - `Step 5`: Gaining root access
                - Check if John has **write** access to <code>/root/.ssh/</code> dir.
                - Repeat the process and append your own public key to root's .ssh dir at `/root/.ssh/authorized_keys` 
                ```bash
                echo "ssh-rsa AAAAB... attacker_public_key" >> /root/.ssh/authorized_keys
                ```
            - `Step 6`: Login as root
                - Logout of John's account and login as root using your own private key
                ```bash
                ssh root@10.10.10.10 -i key
                ```
